One, two, three, four. One, two, three, four. One,
two, three, four. This is the 27th, 9th of May, and
we're at 2100 Vinewood, Owen Word, in Bryan, and I
have the pleasure and honor of recording the A&M
Memories of Joe Hanover. Mr. Hanover, as we begin,
introduce yourself to anyone who will hear this
tape or read the typed version. Describe family
background, growing up, what did your mom and dad
do, where'd y'all live, where'd you go to high
school, all about yourself before you go to A&M.
Okay, I'm Joe. I go by Joe G. Hanover. because there
were two Johanovers and we had to distinguish
between them. In 1925, my family moved to the
little village of Wheelock, which is about 20
miles northeast of Bryan. My father was a cattle
farmer, had sharecroppers on the place. I went to
grammar school in Wheelock. through the ninth
grade, I guess it was, and at that time the high
school had to go to Franklin. We did not have eleven
grades in Wheelock, so they were bused to
Franklin. I did my tenth and eleventh grades in
Franklin.
Graduated from there in 1936. How many in your
senior class? At Franklin? Oh,
I imagine 20 maybe.
And as you were thinking about what to do after high
school, what led you to go to college? I knew when I
went to college what I wanted to do, Haskell. No,
but who encouraged you to go to college? I knew what
I wanted to do because back in the late 20s and early
30s, the highway department was rebuilding the
old San Antonio Road. And I followed the survey
crew up and down that road as far as I could from my
home. and said to everybody, I want to be a civil
engineer when I go to college. And that was run by a
man by the name of Bill Cape. C-A-P-E? C-A-P-E, who
was, I believe, city manager of Bryan at one time,
and ultimately was city manager of Houston. And he
was an A&M graduate. And that's where I got the idea
of what I wanted to do when I got, when I went to
college. Because I'm assuming that your parents
were not college graduates. They were not. And I'm
assuming that A&M was your choice because you knew
about it and knew about its strengths in signal
engineering. And it was close to home. Now you were
born where? McGregor, Texas. In McGregor. That's
about 20 miles west of Waco. Yeah. Now why did your
family move from McGregor to Wheelock? Well, my
father was in the cotton gin business in McGregor,
along with the grain business. He and another
gentleman up there, and in 1923 or 1924, I've
forgotten which it was, his gin burned. And he told
his partner that if he'd take what insurance they
had and take the business, that he would pull out of
it and come to Wheelock and help his father manage
his farm. He had about 1,400 acres there, as I said,
with sharecroppers and ran cattle and needed some
help. So that's why we went there. What were the
money crops on that 1,400 acres? Cotton and corn.
Cotton and corn. Cotton and corn. That's only two
things they raised. But y'all also had chickens
and a few hogs and garden and orchard and
everything. Right. Had everything that you'd in
the kitchen. Before you came to A&M to enroll, you
had visited the campus? Yeah, I had been to that
campus a number of times. My dad used the
veterinary hospital for his animals if he had to
have something to... So many times I visited the
campus with him through the veterinary
department. And what impression did those visits
to A&M make on you and your family? Well, of course,
I knew I wanted to go there in the first place and And
the more we went there, the more I liked it and the
more infatuated with it was, I guess you might say,
and also knew of these engineers that preceded me
that I knew of. Now 1936 was a tough year
financially. What kind of money did you have to
help finance your freshman year? I had one cow and
sold one calf every year and I lived at home. My
grandfather had an old 1929 Chevrolet and he told
me if I could keep it running and keep some people
riding with me to help pay the expenses, I could
drive back and forth and live at home. So I would get
up every morning, help milk seven cows, drive to
A&M, go to school, take the passengers that worked
at A&M.
The AAA had employees, as the Extension Service
had employees, and then two or three students. I
always had a carload, and they shared my expenses
with me. What time did you get up? Before daylight.
Oh, high school I must have gotten up, oh, 530 or so.
And you'd milk those seven cattle. We used to milk
seven. And then... Had to help feed the horses and
mules, eat my breakfast, get dressed and drive 20
miles to A&M. And it took about how long to drive
that 20 miles? About 45 minutes at that time. You
came down what is now... Old San Antonio Road. OSR.
OSR. And then we came through what we call the
Cameron Ranch Road, which is now 2223. It cuts
across from San Antonio Road and comes in on the
Table Road just east of Bryan. About how many
riders did you have? Well, it was a six passenger
car and I always had five besides myself. Okay, so
you filled it up. Filled it up. Did they pay for
anything other than gas? No, they didn't. In fact,
I would charge them just a specified amount each
time, which was just to cover my expenses. So you
didn't make any profit on that? No, I didn't, not
really.
first came down to how did you get admitted? What
was the admissions process there? I don't even
know. I've thought about that a lot of times. I
don't know. I really don't know how I got admitted.
Don't know what the process was. Right. You had to
be officially in the Corps. but you were a day
student. Describe how... Well, there was day
student organizations in the Corps. I belonged to
a day student Coast Artillery outfit. And even
though I was taking engineering, the reason I was
in the Coast Artillery, I was advised that they
liked the engineers in the Coastal Artillery
because all of our spotting and projecting and
manning tables and all were calculated with slide
rules and tables to project the, I mean to
anticipate the projectile trajectory and how far
they'd go and this sort of thing. So I was
encouraged to get in the Coastal Artillery. Now
had you made good grades in high school? I did. I
guess above average.
What kind of math did you take in high school? Do you
remember how far up the ladder you went? took
trigonometry, took no calculus, took
trigonometry and several arithmetics or
whatever they had. Solid geometry and playing.
We're talking about the math you had had in high
school. I had geometry and
Do you remember what sciences you had? Did you have
physics? Yeah. No, I had no physics.
Chemistry? No chemistry, unfortunately. And
that made it tough at A&M. When did you learn to use
the slide rule? At A&M. At A&M, okay. No, I didn't
have none of that in high school. When you came down
here to enroll, Who advised you what courses to
take your freshman year?
Well, there must have been some advisors where I
was enrolling, because they're the ones that
suggested I get into Coast Artillery, and I'm sure
they're the ones that advised me what to take. You
know, Haskell, that's been so far back. I hear you.
Now you were issued a whole bunch of uniforms.
Yeah. And so when you came each day you wore your
core uniforms. Either that or your fatigues. I
had, you know, we had sort of coverall like things
that we wore on certain days. Right. Describe,
describe a typical class day. You got up what time
and did what and where did you, when you came to
campus, where did you park? There was one parking
place on the campus. Only day students were
allowed on the campus with a car. And it was...
Well, there used to be a big water tower up behind
the power plant. On the north side of the campus?
Yes. There was a big parking lot right there, and
that's where we parked. We'd come in in the
morning, I would go by and let the workers out, and
that's the only way you could drive on the campus.
In fact, time or two I got a ticket for driving on the
campus before they knew I was authorized to take
these workers. And come back and I'd park. Well, if
I didn't have a class, I'd go to the library and
study, or study in the car. And if I had as much as two
hours, I worked. I had a student labor job with the
landscape department. There was a fellow by the
name of Horsley that managed the student labor,
and I was fortunate enough to get a student labor
job. Was it Graham Horsley? Wendell Horsley?
Wendell Horsley. Wendell Horsley. And I worked
for the landscape department, and I did
everything in the world. Dug in the flower beds,
pushed lawn mowers, picked the mealybugs off the
the big flowers in that greenhouse. What were some
of the special new projects? Was the grand
driveway going out to Texas Avenue Were those
trees already set out when you got here? Some of
them. Some of them were set out after I was there.
And I helped set out trees. I helped dig them in
the... They grew their own out in the nursery. And
part of the job at times would go out and dig them.
Where was the nursery? It was out... Well, if you
come... It's...
I don't know what street. Was it west of the tracks?
No, no, it was east of the tracks. It was back toward
Bryan on the big boulevard that comes out to
University from Bryan and stops there by the big
engineering building. Back on that road, back
behind those buildings that they built out there
where the students used to live. Okay, back at
College View. Yeah, right. That's where a lot of
the nursery was. Was a young man named Bob Rucker
working? Yes. I worked with Bob. Bob lived in the
greenhouse. That's what I heard. Bob lived in the
greenhouse and got part of his expenses paid by
looking after the greenhouse. Because he was from
Franklin. That's right. I knew him in Franklin. He
was a year or two ahead of me, but Bob Rucker was a, he
was a special sort of a student with the landscape
department. Describe Mr. Horsley and his manner
of working with people. Well, I think he just came
there about the time I did. He was, he was new there.
I don't know whether he came for that purpose or
whether that was settled off onto him about the
student labor. But he was a real nice fellow as far
as the students were concerned, but well liked. We
all thought he treated us very well. He didn't have
any of the management of the labor done. He was more
of the administrative part of the student labor.
What was the pay of you, of you as a student laborer?
Thirty cents an hour. And about how many hours a
week did you work? Well, I could work, I could work
40 hours a month. And I could work anytime I had as
much as two hours. They wouldn't let you work one
hour, but I could work any time I had two hours. And
did you do that all four years? I did. And I sort of
had the insight on that labor. Mr. Hensel, who was
head of the landscape department, was a friend of
my daddy's sister. And she told him I needed a job
down there. And so he was... managed to get me on to
the landscape student labor. Did you do that your
first semester? I did from the time I started. All
four years? Plus all three summers. See my writers
had to be there in the summer and I usually took one
or two courses less in the long term and I'd pick it
up in the summer because I could work in the summer.
I could make a little more in the summer as I
remember. As far as you can recall, about how much
did it cost for you to go to A&M then? I can tell you
pretty close. Okay. Out of pocket, Haskell. Out of
pocket. For four years and three summers, about
$500. Plus your books? Or were the books included
in that? Well, that's what it took for me to go to
A&M. And how much of that did you earn? Oh, well,
it's about $40 a month. I mean $30, let's see, $30 a
month. And see, that would be what, oh, 180 or
whatever $30 a month would come out to.
See, that was part of what I spent. In other words,
over and above that, it was my $500, as I'm talking
about. So I went to school pretty economically.
Now, as you began your college, did your mother or
your dad or anyone else give you any instructions?
Well, they'd give me instructions before I
started. Oh, I had a very, very encouraging
parents, not only when I got to college, but high
school, church, community, the whole business.
It didn't take much encouraging. I knew what I
wanted, and they furnished all the backup that I
needed. My dad told me, when I got ready to go to A&M,
he said, I don't have money to send you to A&M.
Didn't have any money to send me. And said, with
this automobile, I'll furnish your meals at home,
of course. Mother will fix your lunch. I took a
lunch. Didn't have to buy lunch down there. And he
said, if you can make it, well, that'll be fine.
We'd be happy. What was the typical lunch that you
brought? A couple of sandwiches. Made out of what?
Homemade bread. And what kind of meat? Sausage
that they'd made at home, or ham, or bacon that they
had killed the hogs on. And where would you eat that
lunch? Sitting in the car. In the car. Did you drink
anything? I brought water, just brought water
from home. And then there was fountains in the It
was right next to what then was called the
Mechanical Engineering Building. I don't know
what it is now. And then there was a cotton mill on
the backside of it over there too. So we could use
that for our restrooms and water fountains. Now
where would you change your clothes to get out of
your uniforms to put on your work clothes? I'd do
mine over at the
landscape building, where the
flowers were grown.
The horticulture? No, the landscape building,
where Robert Rucker had his room over there.
What do you call it where you keep flowers?
Greenhouse? Greenhouse. That's what I'm trying
to think of. Over at the greenhouse. Just bring
them along in the car and hang them up. All right, so
you would leave home 6.30? Tried to leave by 7.
Because nobody had to be there before 8. Then go to
class. Generally, did you do your landscape work
in the afternoons? Whenever I had two hours. It
could be morning or afternoon. Now, as officially
a member of the Coast Artillery Company, when did
that company gather on campus? Did you all have to
fall out? One afternoon, on a Thursday afternoon.
And what did you do that afternoon? Well, we'd go to
the armory. They had a six-inch gun down there, had
the rifles, had an indoor rifle range, and then had
class work on artillery, artillery spotting,
projectiles, the tables and all for the
artillery. And that's, it was, and then we'd go out
and do close order drill out on the drill field. Now
did your outfit have a nickname?
Don't believe. Your Coast Artillery Company?
Don't believe. I don't remember it if we did. Was
it, what was it, C-1? What was its, did it have a
designation? Well, they were A, B, Company A, I
mean, Battery. We were Batteries. Battery. What
Battery were y'all? Do you remember? Well, it was
the day student. Seemed to me like it was D Battery.
About how many were in that outfit?
I expect there was 75 probably, right, at Haskell.
Did y'all get hazed? I didn't, being a day student.
See, I'm not living on the campus. I was never
involved in hazing at all. And were, now was
everybody in the company a day student? In that
particular company. That's what I mean. That was a
day student company. Was there a nickname? Were
y'all called Day Ducks? Yes, that's what they
were. How did you learn Aggie slang, Aggie
traditions, and all that? Where did they? Just by
association, I guess. Of course, not living in the
dormitory, I didn't get a lot of that that some of
them did. Did you have to whip out to upperclassmen
as you walked across the campus? Oh, yeah. You had
to yes sir and no sir and all that, you know.
Describe as much as you can The courses you had that
first year, what were some of the key courses and
the key teachers? I had English, two courses of
English, first and second English. I had algebra,
algebra one and two. I believe the first year I had
trigonometry. And then somewhere down the line I
had two terms of calculus. I don't know what year.
That probably was the second, maybe. What about
physics? I had physics. I'd be physical the first
year, if I'm not mistaken. And that physics and
chemistry really was tough on me, not having it in
high school. About how big were those classes? Oh,
20 or 25. Do you remember any of the teachers? Oh, I
do. Please describe them. Okay. I remember my
chemistry teacher. His name was Koenig.
K-O-E-N-I-G? Yes. And he lived here in Bryan, and
there's some streets named for him here. He owned
some property. He was my freshman chemistry
teacher. I knew I was going to fail from the time I
started. He had a brogue, he was a German, deep
brogue, and he taught to the level of students
who'd had it in high school, and I knew I wasn't
going to make it. But I stayed with it, I guess I
learned something, and then turned right around
and took it in summer school and made a B on it. But
that's the first First course I ever failed, high
school or any other time.
But the guys that, you know, that had had
chemistry, oh, they could answer all the
questions, you know, and as I say, I knew I was going
to fail. What about English? Do you remember who
taught that? I got my old longhorn out trying to
figure out my English teacher. He was from Bryan
here. And I can see him, but I can't tell you what his
name was. One of them. What about math? Well, the
math teachers were...
Can't come up with them either, Haskell. I don't
know why I can't think of that English teacher. I
can see him just as plain. But I was not too good an
English student either. I passed. In fact, I'll
tell you one teacher I do remember, a history
teacher named Count Shigariff. Have you ever
heard of him? Yes, I have. Describe him, please. He
was the funniest guy you ever did see. I was told he
was an escapee from a Red Russian organization of
some type. And he was comical. And he had a... When
he talked, he rolled his R's. If he called my name,
it's Mr. Hanover.
And he'd roll it big, you know. And he would
threaten you. At that time, as you probably know,
the girls who were favorites of A&M were in CIA up in
Denton, the girls' college. Well, if you couldn't
answer a question correctly, he was going to send
you to CIA. Would it hurt if I say something here?
No. But remember, the circumstance is going to cut
your nuts out first.
Now, what history was this? World history or
American history or European? I guess it was
American history, yeah. And you'd answer
incorrectly. Where'd you get that answer, Mr.
Hannibal? Got it out of the book. The book's no damn
good. Throw it out the window. And some of them
throw the damn thing out the window. He's one that
I'll never forget. I remember one of my civil
engineer teachers named Richie, Cuball Richie,
they called him. And they called him Cuball
because he always erased the board with his fist
like that, and then he'd rub it all over his bald
head. So he was called Cuball Richie. And he was
comical. He would get up and illustrate a stress.
he'd push against the wall till his feet would
slide on the floor. Or if he was talking about a
beam, he'd run over like this, this beam, and that
beam. Just comical. So those kinds of people, I
remember them, remember the names. Hey, you went
to class every day? Every day. Five and a half days.
Yes, yes. On Saturday at the noon. Now, normally
you left campus about what time at the end of the
day? After five. After five. The workers got off at
five. And you'd head home, and what chores did you
have to do at home when you got back? Well, had to
milk those same cows again. They had to be milked
twice a day, seven days a week, you know. I think
that about the routine when I got home, usually
Mother would have a little snack for us or
something. And then we'd bring in the wood or
whatever the chores there had to be. Then we'd try
to get the milking done before dark and then come in
and eat supper. And my routine was after supper I'd
lie down and sleep 15 minutes. And then I could
study till 10, 10.30, 11 and get up the next morning
reasonably. What kind of study space did you have
at home? Had a nice living room, but until I was a
junior, had to study by kerosene lamp. Y'all
didn't have any electricity? No electricity. Did
you have a telephone? Yeah. It's right around on
the wall around here. What was the phone number?
Two longs and a short. You were on a party line? On a
party line. About how many were on that party line?
Twenty or thirty, everybody in the community just
about. And you all lived how far from the paved
road? Well, they paved the old San Antonio Road in
late 29, I mean in late 30s, late 20s. Your family's
place was on the OSR? About 1,500 feet back from the
road, but we were on the old San Antonio Road. How
far to Wheelock? Two miles. And how far to
Franklin? It was 11 miles to Franklin from
Wheelive.
Then I'd go to bed and, well, take a bath and go to
bed. And we had running water in the house. My dad
had arranged some years before to have two
elevated cisterns, he called it, and a windmill.
And when you didn't have any wind, though, we
didn't have any water. And we arranged a place out
in the garden behind the garage with a sprinkler
and a hose, and that's where we took our bath out
there, even in pretty cold weather. And the
temperature of the water was the temperature of
the weather. That's exactly right. Then on
Sunday, church? Yes. Where'd y'all go? We are.
Which church? Methodist.
The church at Wheat Lock was a union church. One
Sunday the Baptist preacher, next Sunday the
Methodist. And so the crowd was the same. My mother
was a devout Baptist, and I was baptized a Baptist.
But when you went to church, you didn't know who was
what.